It was great to be involved in a @CILIPinWales project, led by Kathryn Parry, to produce a list of all the libraries in Wales, display these on a map, and put these into Wikidata. More details on [this CILIP page](https://www.cilip.org.uk/members/group_content_view.asp?group=200145&id=733577).

The work involved Kathryn painstakingly going through lists of libraries in Wales, involving various groups to help out in checking these, and Jason Evans, Wikimedian in residence at the National Library of Wales, pushing them into WikiData.

Sharing and maintaining data on the locations of libraries has been a problem for a long time. In 2012 the Collections Trust published contact details and locations for 4039 public libraries in the UK.  There was a means for UK libraries to update the underlying dataset for this, and it powered the [Find a Library](http://www.bookmarkyourlibrary.org.uk/find-a-library) page on the SCLs Bookmark Your Library site. Unfortunately these stopped being maintained, and the underlying culture grid aggregation platform (which included other library sectors, and far more data than just libraries) was also [discontinued in 2015](https://www.museumscomputergroup.org.uk/culture-grid/).

In 2016 the Libraries Taskforce requested a list of libraries from all 151 English public library authories. At a basic level this included name and address, but also libraries that had closed since 2010, how the libraries were run, and how many hours they were open. Although a useful dataset, it didn't take long for it to become out of date. There is work in progress to address this but it's hard to ignore the work done for Wales, with Scotland also looking at doing something similar.

More than just being useful on its own, maintaining and publishing a list of the libraries in the UK is important because it is the very minimum data we should hold about libraries. If that can be done, and library services can engage with it, it could lead to more useful data. Both for library data, and libraries being involved in using open data platforms for other community datasets.

Wikidata is great, but without library services being interested it just becomes something managed by the community. And while that works in many cases, it wouldn't lead to more open data about libraries. Proving this is something good may lie in exploring what can be done with that basic data, and then asking for more.

### Assessing areas by distance to a public library

One quick piece of analysis to do with the locatons of libraries is to assess areas in Wales by distance to a public library. There are 91,123 postcodes in Wales. Open Data is available from Ordnance Survey that can be used to roughly give the distance from a postcode to the nearest library (straight line distance).

One problem with this is that although people may be interested in how far they area from a library, it's likely just to highlight areas that are particularly rural (e.g. 5  miles from a library) as being 'poor' when in reality they are just countryside areas where you wouldn't expect to see a library in immediate view.

So, a more interesting way of tackling this is to rank the postcodes only against areas of the same rural/urban classification. The Office for National Statistics provide rural/urban classifications of areas so we can assign these to postcodes and ensure we only rank postcodes on distance to a library against postcode from the same classification.

Go to the Wales Library Postcode to check out your postcode (it must be a postcode in Wales). Alternatively, a complete spreadsheet of all postcodes in Wales with the grading (A* - F) is available to download here.

It's interesting that the Wales public library standard assessment (https://gov.wales/topics/culture-tourism-sport/museums-archives-libraries/libraries/public-library-standards/?lang=en) gave precise details of what was considered acceptable for locations of libraries between 2014 and 2017:

>> Where the population 
density is 20 or more persons per hectare, at least 95% should live within two miles of a 
static service point. For those authorities with a population density between 1.1 and 19.9 
persons per hectare, at least 75% should live within 2.5 miles (or 10 minutes travelling time 
on public transport) of a static service point or within a quarter of a mile from a mobile library 
stop. For those authorities with a population density of 1.0 persons per hectare or fewer, at 
least 70% should live within 3 miles (or 15 minutes travelling time on public transport) of a 
static service point, or within quarter of a mile of a mobile library stop. All authorities have 
fully met the target in each year of the framework.

The population density in these cases is presumably per authority but in reality the assessment could be done at much lower levels than across whole authorities.

### Account for travel distance

Wales is a country with a great natural beaty and distinctive geographic features. The Brecon Beacons.

My favourite place in Wales in Llanelli. It has a lovely library that has a Costa Coffee machine that plays the sound of a Cafe across the library. This may be an atrocity to some, but there's nothing quite like working in Llanelli library, near the checkout desk, with a disposable cup of machine made hot chocolate, and hearing artificial sounds of cafe clutter coming out of the machine.


A good illustration 


### Finding areas that need a library

A couple of months ago, a Public Libraries News article, Library Library Library http://www.publiclibrariesnews.com/2018/03/library-library-library-a-tv-show-featuring-libraries-plus-scl-on-london-choice.html a couple of months ago mentioned that a TV company was interested in finding a place that was 


>> a television company has been in touch, saying it is looking for areas of the UK which have either never had a library or lost one more than a few years ago. The aim is to build/provide a top-class library in that area and show the impact it can have. The company has been impressed by research from New York that building a library had a positive impact on unexpected things like the crime rate and spousal abuse

It's difficult to see how a TV company could measure the impact of a top class library in an area over a significant period of time, but supposing they could, the first step would be to try to find an area and get building a library.

1. How do we define an area in need of a library?

For deprivation measures in Wales, a good source of data is the Welsh Index of Multiple Deprivation (WIMD), last updated in 2014. These are published in full at https://statswales.gov.wales/Catalogue/Community-Safety-and-Social-Inclusion/Welsh-Index-of-Multiple-Deprivation/WIMD-2014

Wales is split into 1909 Lower Super Output Areas (LSOAs). These are fairly small statistical areas, consisting of around 1500 people, assessed by Income, Employment, Health, Education, Access to Services, Community Safety, Physical Environment, and Housing.

It's easy enough to find the area of highest deprivation, according to those measures. Download the spreadheet of WIMD and the area ranked 1 is called

When the TV company asked for an area that may be in need of a library they probably meant a recognisable place name. Aberystwyth, Llanelli, that kind of thing.
People don't talk in LSOAs. I live in Corsham, and like it because it has a nice bookshop and a few local pubs. I don't say that I live in E0043244 and like it because it has a deprivation decile of 7.

Of course an LSOA is within a larger place that will be more recognisable, but it is likely to be too small to represent that place on its own. In the example of 

WHat we really need is some kind of assessment of the deprivation of actual places. The ONS have areas called 'Built up Areas'. 

2. How do we define an area not already having a library?


